[Music] Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger. Today
we're going to carry on with our laying out of
some fundamental logical weaknesses with modern
abstract algebra. Last time we talked about the
issues with definitions and specifications.
Today I want to concentrate on the very big
jump in trying to go from talking about finite
objects to infinite objects. So currently,
when we say infinite objects, we have
quotation marks around them. That's
not necessary in all cases—perhaps we
can create infinite kinds of objects,
but we have to do so carefully and ultimately in
a finite way. So we may have to have a workaround,
okay, and that's going to be part of the story
here. So today I want to talk about a particular
example that illustrates both some interesting
aspects of finite group theory and then moving
on to infinite group theory. We're going to
employ a little bit about matrices as well,
which should be interesting. So this issue
of transitioning from finite to infinite.
So with current modern algebra, we are often
treating infinite algebraic objects with the
same framework as finite ones. This is almost
invariably a result of sloppy thinking. So the
strategy is that if our basic definitions are
fuzzy enough and imprecise enough, then yes,
we can hope that we cast a big enough net so that
both finite and infinite objects are embraced at
the same time. But in fact, going from finite
groups to infinite groups is a huge step and
requires really different, separate thinking. Same
thing going from finite rings to infinite rings or
from finite fields to infinite fields. In fact,
pretty well every abstract algebraic object has
the same problem, okay? We need different kinds
of thinking, we need often a more general kind
of framework that gets at infinite procedures in
a finite way. So we have to think more carefully
and often we have to be a little bit clever. So I
want to illustrate the issues at hand by looking
at group theory and a particularly interesting
example, that of SL2. So that's the context of
2x2 matrices with determinant one. The SL stands
for special linear, so this is the special linear
group, okay? So let me remind you of a few
basic facts about 2x2 matrices. First of all,
the matrix a b c d has determinant a d minus b c.
That's a number associated with a 2x2 matrix and
here is the familiar product of two matrices and
here is the basic rule about determinants that
if you take the determinant of a product of two
matrices, so A and B might be these two matrices,
and then you take the determinant of this thing,
it turns out to be the product of the determinant
of A times the determinant of B. So this is
the fundamental fact about determinants. In
particular, if A and B both have determinant
one, then their product is also going to have
determinant one. That's the basic property that
makes this kind of thing into actually a group.
Okay, so now let's have a look at a rather
specific case of 2x2 matrices with determinant
one where we're looking at everything from the
point of view of mod 2 arithmetic. In mod 2
arithmetic, it's a very simple kind of modular
arithmetic—there are really only two values,
zero and one, because two is declared to be like
zero. So the group that we're defining here is
a set of matrices a, b, c, d where the entries
a, b, c, d are all from the set zero and one,
so each entry is either 0 or 1 and the overall
determinant a d minus b c is congruent to 1 mod 2,
so it could be one or it could also be minus
one because mod 2 minus one is the same as
one and the multiplication, we state that this
is the multiplication of matrices mod 2. That
means after you do the multiplication you simplify
everything mod 2. Okay, so this is definitely an
A3 Prime type of definition in that we are using
descriptive language to specify the set and also,
well, we're basically sort of talking about what
the multiplication is instead of laying it out
in form of an array a, okay, or a functional
set. By the way, the name for this group is
traditionally SL2 F2, the F2 referring to the
fact that we are basically working in a field
with two elements. So for example, here are
two matrices—this one has determinant 1 - 0,
that's one, this one has determinant 0 - 1, that's
minus one, but minus one is the same as 1 mod 2,
so this also is a matrix that belongs
to this set and the product is 1, 1,
1 + 1 is 2, which is the same as zero, and 1 +
0 is 1, and so that's also an entry of this set.
So we're using mod 2 arithmetic when we do the
multiplication. So note that this definition,
it's one of these A3 Prime definitions, it's
not very specific about what the set actually
explicitly is and it does leave us to understand
what or to compute what the multiplication is. In
other words, it's not telling us directly what
the product of these two things is, it's giving
us a recipe for us to be able to compute what the
product is. So it's a different kind of structure
than when you are given the multiplication table
directly just as a table and you're not required
to understand anything more—you just look up
stuff. Here, we're asked to calculate stuff.
All right, so for our computer, this requires
some more sophistication because we have to know
something about matrix multiplication in order
to understand what this group is. So I want you
to appreciate that different definitions really do
lead to different kinds of group theory. So let's
unpack the previous A3 Prime kind of definition
to a more explicit A2 kind of specification. This
is using the language of our previous video. So
then what we need to do is we need to determine
explicitly first of all what actually the elements
of this group are, and here I've actually listed
the elements of the group. It turns out that
there's exactly six matrices made up of zeros
and ones that have determinant one, at least when
you're working mod 2. Here they are—there's the
identity matrix and then there's this one which
is a little bit like the identity off-diagonal,
and then these other ones have a single zero in
each of the four places and otherwise ones. And
then here is a multiplication table, an explicit
array that lists these elements in exactly that
order both horizontally and vertically and then
tells you what the various products are. So the
product of this matrix times this one is this one,
you can check that, hopefully I've done all the
multiplications correctly. So if we were thinking
about groups in terms of the A2 definition,
then we would say "Aha, here is the definition
of this group G, here is the set and here is the
multiplication table as given by this 6x6 array."
It's different, it's a different way of thinking
about what a group is. And now here is that same
group but viewed from the A1 definition. This was
the most computer-oriented definition where we
require that the elements be converted to just
numbers 1, 2, 3, up to K where K is the number of
elements in the group, and that we record just the
array, the K by K array of multiplications in the
language of 1 to K. So what I've done is I've just
replaced the six matrices in the order that I gave
you them in the previous slide with the numbers 1
through six and I've just converted the table into
a corresponding multiplication table now for the
numbers 1 through six. So notice that we've lost
information because the original definition of the
objects as 2x2 matrices with a certain determinant
etc. and the original matrix multiplication mod 2
formula for the multiplication, these are now
lost. We no longer see them, we just see the
Bare Bones algebraic structure of what multiplies
to what to get what. So this is a very efficient
way of thinking but it does really look at
things from just a pure algebraic point of view.
Okay, okay, um but this is a a pleasant group
with six elements, it's one that we should
be familiar with. So as an exercise, show that
up to relabeling this is the same group as S3,
it's the same as the symmetric group on three
things which we've seen before, but it's now
not in terms of permutations, not in terms of
matrices but just in terms of multiplications of
the numbers 1 through six. And when I say "up to
labeling" we should be aware that this particular
multiplication table is what we've obtained by
choosing a particular order of the elements,
right? If we had chosen a different order of the
six elements then we would have gotten a different
multiplication table, so there's a little bit of
subtlety here about how the ordering and choice
of ordering determines the multiplication table.
But from an A1 point of view, a group is just a
multiplication table like this. Convince yourself
this is really S3 in disguise. And so now let's
make a jump from this finite group that we've been
looking at to a sort of infinite version. Okay,
so we'll get an infinite version by replacing
the finite condition that the entries are just
zeros and ones with a more general condition that
will allow a c and d to be arbitrary integers and
we won't do mod 2 arithmetic, we'll do ordinary
integer arithmetic so the determinant has to be
exactly one. So this is now a new group H, let's
say, and its name might be SL2 Int because it's
special linear group determinant one with integer
entries and we'll specify that the multiplication
is just matrix multiplication. So this is very
much an A3 Prime type of definition. We are just
giving a description of a set, a set in quotes,
very big quotes, and a description of matrix
multiplication as being the multiplication that's
involved. We are definitely not exhibiting the set
as a set with all the elements there for you. We
are definitely not exhibiting the multiplication
in terms of an array where you can see the
entire array in your database. That's going
to be impossible because there's going to be an
unbounded number of such matrices. This is not a
finite group, it's unbounded, and in particular
these integers can get very big. So for example,
here is a matrix with determinant 1, 6 -
5, here's another one with determinant 1,
that's - 7 + 8, that's + one. So the product
of these two matrices is that one there,
you can check, and you can also check that
the inverse of one of these matrices is also
a matrix of the same type. That's an important
observation, and so it's nice to note that the
inverse of such a 2x2 determinant one matrix is
obtained by transposing the diagonal elements,
so they swap places, and the off diagonal
elements get multiplied by minus one. You can
check that when you make the multiplication
then you do get the identity matrix.
Okay, so this is a very interesting group and
it's actually a group that's studied very much
in number theory and in geometry as well. So it's
a very important group mathematically, SL2 over
the integers, but it's an infinite group via this
A3 Prime definition. So in modern mathematics, we
do not, we do not have any problems with making a
definition like this. So this would be absolutely
routine kind of definition that you would find in
mathematical papers throughout the subject. But we
are going to look more skeptically at this because
we recognize that this definition here, this A3
Prime kind of definition, really finesses some
key points, namely it doesn't tell us explicitly
what all the objects are and it doesn't tell
us explicitly what the multiplication actually
is. It's up for us to generate elements, and we're
only going to be able to do that obviously sort of
up to a point because there's an unbounded number
of these determinant one 2x2 integral matrices,
and it's up to us to sort of work out what the
multiplication table is from this sort of basic
direction here. So this kind of definition is
definitely not in the spirit of A1 and A2, and
in fact from the spirit of A1 and A2, if you had
that as your orientation, you would not be able to
take this and to transform it into something that
was meaningful to you, right? If you're a computer
that has been trained to understand that a group
is a an array with you know index by 1 to K, 1 to
K, it's a K by K array with certain properties,
you're not going to be able to express this in
that language. This is going to be outside your
understanding. Similarly with the A2 definition,
even if you're allowed to not use the numbers 1
through K, but rather some arbitrary kind of set,
you're still not able to list all of the elements.
And when we start thinking about things, okay,
when we start thinking especially with the point
of view of bigger numbers, we start to appreciate
that a lot of these matrices inevitably are going
to end up involving very big numbers, and then we
run into the same kinds of problems that we do
when we're considering the set of numbers from
one to Z. We talked before about this, right? What
does it mean to talk about the set of numbers from
one to Z because we know that most of those
numbers are too big to fit into the known
universe. They are completely invisible to us.
Well, very similarly, that's going to happen with
the entries of this group as well. Most of these
matrices that we're going to end up considering
are going to have entries which are so big that
they don't fit into the universe. So exactly the
same kind of problems are going to occur here
that it's no longer clear that we really have
control over all such matrices. In reality,
we only have control up to a certain point,
up to the point that we're able to do arithmetic,
but here we're positing that we are going to
consider this whole thing even beyond the limits
of our arithmetic. Okay, so from a computational
point of view, this is fraught with difficulties.
But modern mathematics doesn't recognize that,
doesn't see that, because it's quite happy
to allow such sort of sloppy definitions,
because for one thing it makes it easier to make
this transition from finite to infinite things,
because if you're not going to be concrete about
specifying stuff, then it doesn't really matter if
you become a little bit more sloppy by introducing
an infinite number of things into the story,
infinite number in quotes. So let me phrase what
we've been discussing in the following lesson,
that if we use the sloppy A3 Prime definition
or description of a group, and I'm inclined to
think of it more as a description rather than
a definition, then we can substitute infinite
set for finite set with impunity because part of
the whole story is that we are not being careful
about what the word set means in the first place.
But on the other hand, if we adopt a more careful
computational approach along the lines of the A1
or A2 definitions which are geared more towards
what a computer can understand, then we must
do more work if we want to go from the finite
group definition to an infinite group definition.
It's not enough just to replace the word group
or finite group with the word infinite group. We
must actually understand things from a different
point of view. So we're going to need separate
definitions of group and infinite group. These are
not going to be things which are found in the same
basket. How to do this is a very good question and
we are going to talk about that. But at this
point, I just want to flag that there is a big
jump if you're going to do things properly between
understanding finite concrete explicit objects and
infinite versions of them. All right, currently we
only have quotes around all the infinite versions,
and to make theories where there's no quotes and
things are actually precise, a lot more work is
required. In our next video, I want to talk about
our third issue that abstract algebra really needs
to wrestle with, and that's the fundamental
theorem of algebra. All right, so we're going
to have to say some uncomfortable truths about the
current PR to this important but currently dubious
result. I hope you'll join me for that. I'm
Norman Wildberger. Thanks for [Music] listening.